The versions of the fonts here have been MODIFIED by A C Norman
(September 2004) in an attempt to circumvent what appears at the
time of writing to be an X server anomaly that caused some characters
to fail to appear on the screen. The modification was performed as
follows:

(Also the names specified for the fonts seemed to make it hard for me
to use fontconfig/Xft to select them, so I changed names.)

(a) Use t1disasm to convert the fonts from binary (*.pfb) to human-
    readable form.
(b) Remove the AMS copyright notices as required by their terms-of-use
    document. Observe that this is not just permitted but required!
    [required by AMS]
(c) Change so that the "family name" fully identifies that font, and all
    names for the font are in lower case.
    [seems to be required so that fontconfig/Xft/freetype can match the
    font in an unambiguous way]
    Also make the names include "csl-reduce" so as to further reduce any
    possibility with any other sets of related fonts.
(d) Duplicate the definition of the first glyph defined by textually
    copying its definition, but giving that Postscript procedure
    a new name (eg /acnminus).
    [The x.org server on Cygwin and several Unix systems appears not to
    be able to render ?the first glyph defined in a type1 font?. Even if
    this is an X bug and it gets fixed there are liable to be broken X
    server configurations in use for some time so a work around by using
    a custom font seems safer to me]
(e) Altering the setting for symbol 161 to be the new not the old
    version of the definition, but NOT changing the version for
    character code 0.
    [There are copies of glyphs with raw code 0-31 and 127 mapped at
    161...]
(f) Use t1asm -b to convert the font back to binary packed form, and
    t1asm to nake an ascii packed form.
    [The *.pfa forms are for embedding in documents for printing.]
(g) Use type1inst to create a fonts.scale (etc) index file. Review
    these by hand.
(h) Use fontforge to create Truetype versions of the fonts, ensuring tha
    the truetype styles (sub-family) give the name I want (eg cmr10).
    See fontforge.sf.net.
    [On Windows I explictly use the Truetype versions, in part because I
    expect that to support old versions of Windows best. I am aware that
    my truetype versions of the fonts will not be as well hinted as would
    be perfect. But anybody with a better truetype version of these fonts
    could just drop the truetype file in to my fonts directory. I keep all
    the various formats present across all platforms to make it easier for
    me to manage things, but the type1 fonts are used on Unix/Linux/Darwin
    and the Truetype ones on Windows.]
    I now use BaKoMa truetype fonts rather than ones derived from here...

This process should not change the shape, metrics or encoding of any
character.



             A C Norman.  October 2004


January 2009: I find that on some Linux systems some mathml (perhaps)
application provides fonts that clash with these and cause dreadful
confusion!

