
GNUPLOT is a command-driven interactive function plotting program. It
is case sensitive (commands and function names written in lowercase
are not the same as those written in CAPS). All command names may be
abbreviated, as long as the abbreviation is not ambiguous. Any number
of commands may appear on a line, separated by semicolons (;).
Strings are indicated with quotes.  They may be either single or double
quotation marks, e.g.,

         load "filename"
         cd 'dir'

Any command-line arguments are assumed to be names of files containing
GNUPLOT commands, with the exception of standard X11 arguments, which
are processed first. Each file is loaded with the `load` command, in the
order specified. GNUPLOT exits after the last file is processed.  When
no load files are named, gnuplot enters into an interactive mode.

Commands may extend over several input lines, by ending each
line but the last with a backslash (\). The backslash must be the LAST
character on each line. The effect is as if the backslash and newline
were not there. That is, no white space is implied, nor is a comment
terminated. Therefore, commenting out a continued line comments out
the entire command (see `comment`).

For help on any topic, type `help` followed by the name of the topic.

The new GNUPLOT user should begin by reading about the `plot`
command (type `help plot`).  The manual for gnuplot can be printed
either with TeX, troff or nroff.  Look at the docs/Makefile for
the appropriate option.

                   Where to get updates to GNUPLOT

Congratulations on getting this version of GNUPLOT! Unfortunately, it
may not be the most recent version ("you never know where this version
has been!"). You can be sure that it IS the most recent version by
checking one of the official distribution sites, guaranteed to be kept
up to date (of course, if you got this file from one of those sites,
you don't need to check!).

To hear automatically about future releases (and other GNUPLOT news),
join the mailing list; see below.

At the time of this writing, the following are the official
distribution sites and transfer instructions. Note that
prep.ai.mit.edu is NOT an official site, and may not be up to date.
Also, comp.sources.misc is usually a month or so behind us.

Date: Sun Mar 1 20:45:52 EDT 1992
Version: 3.2

In general, GNUPLOT 3.2 is available as the file gnuplot3.2.tar.Z.
There are patches which bring GNUPLOT 3.0 up to 3.1 and patches
which bring GNUPLOT 3.1 up to GNUPLOT 3.2.  The latter are in
the file gnuplot3.2.shar.Z.
There are no patches that bring GNUPLOT 2.02 up to 3.0, so you must
obtain the whole new release. 
Please obtain gnuplot from the site
nearest you.

USENET users:

    GNUPLOT 3.2 was posted to comp.sources.misc.


NORTH AMERICA:

     Anonymous ftp to dartmouth.edu (129.170.16.4)
     Fetch
        pub/gnuplot/gnuplot3.2.tar.Z
     in binary mode.

     Users without ftp capability can obtain it through a mail ftp
     server. Send a mail message saying 'help' to
     BITFTP@pucc.princeton.edu for instructions. For a uuencoded
     copy of the gnuplot sources (compressed tar file), send this
     message to BITFTP@pucc.princeton.edu:
         FTP DARTMOUTH.EDU UUENCODE
         USER ANONYMOUS
         CD pub/gnuplot
         BINARY
         GET gnuplot3.2.tar.Z
         QUIT


AUSTRALIA:

     Anonymous ftp to monu1.cc.monash.edu.au (130.194.1.101).
     Fetch pub/gnuplot3.2.tar.Z in binary mode.


EUROPE:

     Anonymous ftp to irisa.irisa.fr (131.254.2.3).
     Fetch pub/gnuplot3.2.tar.Z in binary mode.

----

     DISCLAIMER - This product is not related in any way to
     Pixar or any other commercial venture.

----
  CONTACTS:
     Please send any questions or comments to
        info-gnuplot@ames.arc.nasa.gov.
     To join the above mailing list (or get yourself off), mail to
        info-gnuplot-request@ames.arc.nasa.gov.
     Send bug reports and problems to
        bug-gnuplot@ames.arc.nasa.gov.

                                        -Thomas Williams-

