            Adjusted versions of the (free) BaKoMa TeX fonts  

The *.ttf files here are the BaKoMa ones *except* that they have been editited
to make two additions of the charecter encoding tables:
(a) The character that would seem naturally to belong at position
    0xb7 had been places at 0x2219 in the font. I have made a copy of it
    back at 0xb7 in place of the ".notdef" otherwise present in that
    location.
(b) The character at position 0xad is hard to access on X11 and MacOSX
    because that Unicode point is used for SHY, the "Soft Hyphen", and
    default rendering code does not display anything there regardless of
    any data in the font. So I have made a copy of that data at code point
    0xc5 just beyond other relocated glyphs.
(c) The file-names and the font-names have been adjusted from (eg)
    cmr10/cmr10.ttf to csl-cmr10/csl-cmr10.ttf to avoid any possible
    confustion between these and the regular versions on any TeX fonts. 

It is probable that I could have worked around the encoding difficulties by
implementing special custom support for encoding in my applications, and
indeed for 0x2219 that worked happily provided I build everythng in Unicode
mode. But the adjustmenst made here seem to me to be the simplest way around
the problems of 0xad/SHY.

It thus becomes VITAL that these adjusted versions of the TeX fonts are used
and not any unadjusted but otherwise similar ones.

The permissions associated with the fonts, as indicated in the files in
this directory, permit me to make these changes.

                Arthur Norman    November 2010


    Adjusted versions of the Latin Modern and Latin Modern Math Fonts


The Latin Modern Fonts are subject to the GUST Font license which is an
instance of the LaTeX Project Public License (version 1.3c or higher). So
let me first deal with the request that they make... that asks that any
any derived work renames both fonts and files. What I have here does
count as "derived" within the meaning of the LaTeX license, however it
should not change the shapes of glyphs in the fonts or any of their metrics
ans so ought not to lead to confusion, so I have (at least for now) not
altered names. A MANIFEST-Latin-Moderm.txt file lists files that these
terms apply to.

Now as to the LaTeX Project Public License. That starts with a view that
even just rearranging the packing of files consitutes the creation of
a (modified) derived work, so what I have here falls squarely in that state.
Thus redistribution relies on Clauses 6 and 7 of the license:
 (6a) What I have here is not set up to be a direct replacement for
      any part of a LaTeX installation, and so no special requirements
      apply.
 (6b) This files will contain a log of the changes made, thus satisfying
      obligations. I believe that having the explanations in a file named
      README should count as prominent.
 (6c) There is no obligation on anybody to provide support for the fonts
      unless that person has explicitly stated that they will support
      this particular version.
 (6d) The original fonts were obtained from www.gust.org.pl and are
      also present at TeX archives. In the Reduce source files there are
      unmodified versions in trunk/csl/support-packages and those
      versions can be fetched from reduce-algebra.sourceforge.net by
      browsing the Reduce subversion repository.
 (7)  I believe says I can rely in the terms in (6) when distributing
      binary font files as distinct from the metafont (or other) source.

These rules are transitive, in that anybody receiving Reduce must apply
them, and that is more restrictive than the terms of the BSD license that
apply to the bulk of Reduce itself. But it is flexible in that about the
only practical limitation is that any redistribution of fonts needs to
include this file or suitable equivalent information. So simple copying
of a full working version of Reduce (either in source or binary form)
should be covered.

The changes made are:
 (1) I have extracted fonts from the original .zip archive and placed them
     at the locations within the Reduce Tree where fonts wish to live.
 (2) While at the time of writing I have not yet pruned things, I will
     only need a subset of the full set of Latin Modern fonts, and so I
     will omit some of them... for instance to save space.
 (3) When I tried to render the supplied .oft fonts on a Windows platform
     the Windows 7 font viewer allowed me to preview them but the
     code I had using wxWidgets appeared not to be able to find any glyphs
     in the fonts (even though it could open them and report success). So
     to back up the .oft versions I used fontforge to do a direct conversion
     to the older .ttf format. On non-windows platforms I can use the
     original .oft fonts, but on Windows I use the .ttf variants. If at some
     stage I can understand what the issue there was I will be able to
     discard the .ttf versions!
 (4) Reduce and associated tools will use these as private application-
     specific fonts, not installing them in ways intended for use by other
     programs. That ought to minimise any possibility of confusion or
     degradation.

                Arthur Norman.  February 2014
